---
title: "hash: You've probably never heard of this thing that affects every command you've ever typed in a terminal"
permalink: /hash/
---

## What You Think Happens When You Type Something in the Command Line

When you type a command into the terminal, how does the computer know where to find the program you asked it to run?

Dumb question, I know. It's `which`, right?

```
$ which ls
/bin/ls
```

Actually, no. Here's the problem with `which`. `which` finds the program you ask it for, but it does so by walking through your *entire* `$PATH` looking for matches. Now if your `$PATH` looks something like this...

```
/Users/andrew/.rbenv/shims:/Users/andrew/.nvm/versions/node/v0.12.7/
bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/
usr/local:/opt/X11/bin:/usr/local/git/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/
bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/opt/X11/bin:/usr/local/git/bin:/Applications/
Wireshark.app/Contents/MacOS:/usr/local/opt/fzf/bin
```

...then looking through the whole thing is going to be sloooooowwww. 

Imagine if that process had to repeat *every* time you ran a command. Say you fire off 5 `tar` commands in a row because [you forgot the flags again](https://xkcd.com/1168/). Every time you hit `enter`, you're sitting there like an idiot waiting for *milliseconds* before you program even begins to execute, while your computer is out there somewhere, `which`ing merrily along, looking for the same copy of `tar` that it just found a second ago.

Those are milliseconds that you will never get back.

Fortunately for us, our UNIX forbearers decreed "This sucks". Like most problems in Computer Science, it was solved with a hash table.

## Enter `hash`

The first time you use a program in a new shell session, the computer does a `which`-style lookup to find where that program lives. It does this exactly once. After that it stores the location of that program in a hash table, so the next time you ask it to run that same program it knows exactly where to find it. 

We can perform operations on this table and look at its state using the appropriately-named `hash` command. It's appropriately named for two reasons: 1) because it's a hash table, and 2) because it's dank. 

Let's open a new shell session, run a command, and then look at the state of our table with `hash -l`:

```
$ ls /tmp/
afile.go  somefile.txt
$ hash -l
builtin hash -p /bin/ls ls
```

As you can see the computer found a copy of `ls` at `/bin/ls`. From now on, as long as you keep this shell session alive, that's the `ls` it's going to use.

So what happens if we get rid of `/bin/ls`? 

```
$ which -a ls
/bin/ls
/usr/sbin/ls
$ mv /bin/ls /bin/totally-not-ls-nothing-to-see-here-this-is-a-whole-different-thing
```

As you can see, there are multiple copies of `ls` on our `$PATH`, so obviously the computer should be smart enough to detect that the one in its `hash` table is no longer there, and go find another one.

```
$ ls
-bash: /bin/ls: No such file or directory
$ which ls
/usr/sbin/ls
```

Just kidding. The moment a program's location gets stored in the `hash` table, the computer assumes it will never need to find another location for the program, which can lead to frustrating errors like this.

If you get in this situation and don't know about `hash`, this is infuriating. What do you *mean* there's no such file or directory. You just **TOLD** me where it is!!!!

But now that you know about `hash`, you need not be afraid. The solution is actually quite simple: just open a new shell session and start over with a clean `hash` table, or use `hash -r` to refresh your hash table.

```
$ ls
-bash: /bin/ls: No such file or directory
$ hash -r 
$ hash -l
hash: hash table empty
$ ls /tmp/
afile.go  somefile.txt
$ which ls
/usr/sbin/ls
```

*Did you like this post? Or maybe do you think it was long, droning, and ill-conceived? Tell me what you'd like to see more or less ofß in the comments below!*
